Welcome to this lecture an optical flow we're going to begin discussing object tracking by first learning
about optical flow optical flow is the pattern of apparent motion of image objects between two consecutive
frames caused by the movement of either the object or the camera.
Now keep in mind the optical flow analysis that we're going to be using here has a few assumptions.
One is that the pixel intensities of an object do not change between consecutive frames.
So that means basically you're not trying to track a light bulb that's turning off and on as it moves
between frames of video.
And also that neighboring pixels have similar motion.
So that means the actual pixels around the point you're trying to track such as the center of light
bulb are also moving along.
So if you're trying to track just the corner points of a light bulb then all the other pixels that also
consist of light bulb are moving along with it.
So it's not just some random single point moving.
We need the neighboring pixels to move as well OK.
The optical flow method is an open C-v will first take in a given set of points and the frame then it
will attempt to find those points in the next frame.
And it's actually up to the user to supply the points to track.
So we're going to start off by supplying points of a face using the face detection methods that we already
learned about and then asking open Suvi to then track it throughout the video.
So again we're going to first utilize what we know about object detection to the face and then we use
optical flow to actually show the flow of the face.
So let's talk about optical flow and a little more detail.
Consider the following image.
Hear what we're trying to explain is a five frame clip of a ball moving up and towards the right note
that given just this clip we actually can't determine if it's the ball it's moving up to the right or
if the camera was moving down and to the left.
And for these primitive techniques that we're learning about so far we're actually not going to be able
to detect the difference between that and it kind of makes sense given that you don't actually know
if the camera was held in place or if it was moving.
Then there's really no way to convey that information just from the video itself.
Given the optical flow techniques that we're doing right now so keep that in mind it could just be either
the camera itself is moving or the objects are moving.
For all the examples we're going to show here the cameras just as you previously mentioned the general
way we actually tracked the object is we passen previous frame previous points.
And in the current frame and the function or a formula that open C-v uses and it's built in optical
flow function is the Luca's Kanade method.
So you can go ahead and check out the resource links for the math by this method but luckily it's an
easy to call function within open C.v.
So what we do here is let's imagine we're actually trying to track the object from frame 4 to frame
5 because frame 5 is the most recent frame in our video.
What we do is at some point we would have had to have told Open see what the point we wanted to track
is and it's up to you if you want to determine that simply by manually selecting a point by clicking
on the image of the first frame and then letting open see the truck from there on.
Or if you want to use a more advanced technique such as object detection so you may want to detect the
face in the very first frame and then have that be tracked throughout the rest of the video.
Here were just mainly saying there is the point that I want to track.
So we went ahead and put a Greenpoint on top of that for frame than we take in the entire previous frame.
And then we look at our current frame and what this function attempts to do is locate the points from
frame for that we wanted to track and find them in frame 5.
Notice that again we're having a couple of assumptions here.
And that is that the points next to are the pixels next the point that we're trying to track are also
moving.
So even though we're just tracking that center of the ball the rest of the ball's pixels are also moving
from frame 4 to frame 5.
Now look at Kanade computes optical flow for a sparse feature set.
And what I mean by that term sparse is we're only really tracking the points we were telling it to track.
So it's typically not all the points in the video.
It's just a few key points so we want to track but sometimes we actually want to track all the points
in the video and the Luca's Kanade method is not going to do that for us.
Instead we're going to use the gunner foreign banks algorithm which is also built into open TV to calculate
what's known as dense optical flow and this dense optical flow will calculate flow for all the points
in an image and the effect is actually really cool.
And we'll be using that built in open C-v to show you what that looks like and basically what happens
is it colors the entire video black.
If nothing is moving.
And then as an object moves you will see it being highlighted and it's going to be highlighted a different
color.
The painting with angle it's moving up in reference to the previous point it was that before.
So that's easier to kind of show when we actually program.
So keep that in mind.
We'll be showing both the Spurs feature set at the Lucas Kanade method and kind of showing the optical
flow that way of just a few points to track.
But then we're also going to move on and talk about dense optical flow.
So both of these methods are really cool and they're actually really easy to use up and see the now.
I highly encourage you to check out the resource links for full descriptions and publication links for
these two algorithms.
Keep in mind that if you really want to dive into the way the algorithms work you should have a strong
linear algebra background to understand the math behind these methods.
OK let's get started by coding these out with open CV.
I'll see at the next lecture.